## Chapter 6 Structure of operators in inner product spaces.

### 2. Spectral theorem for self-adjoint and normal operators.

> 2.15 Show by example that conclusion of Theorem 2.2 (spectral theorem of self-adjoint operator) fails for complex symmetric matrices. Namely
>> a) construct a (diagonalizable) $2\times 2$ complex symmetric matrix not admitting an orthogonal basis of eigenvectors;
>> b) construct a $2\times 2$ complex symmetric matrix which cannot be diagonalized.

标准双线性形：$(\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y}) := \sum x_iy_i = \mathbf{y}^T\mathbf{x}$（对比埃尔米特内积 $(\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y})_H = \sum x_i\overline{y_i} = \mathbf{y}^*\mathbf{x}$）. 对称矩阵对应其自伴算子：$(A\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y}) = A\mathbf{y}^T\mathbf{x} =  A^T\mathbf{y}^T\mathbf{x} = (\mathbf{x},A\mathbf{y})$. 此时不再保持正定性，允许各向同性（isotropy）向量：$(\mathbf{v},\mathbf{v}) = 0, \mathbf{v}\neq \mathbf{0}$，例如 $\mathbf{v} = (1,i)^T$. 若算子包含各向同性的特征向量 $\mathbf{v}$，则 $\mathbf{v}\in \operatorname{span}(\mathbf{v})$ 且 $\mathbf{v}\in \mathbf{v}^\perp$，因而不再有直和分解 $V = \operatorname{span}(\mathbf{v})\oplus \mathbf{v}^\perp$，故不可对角化。

### 3. Polar and singular value decompositions.

> 3.9. Let $s$ be the largest singular value of an operator $A$, and let $\lambda$ be the eigenvalue of $A$ with largest absolute value. Show that $|\lambda| \leq s$.

\[ |\lambda|\left\lVert \mathbf{v} \right\rVert  = \left\lVert A\mathbf{v} \right\rVert = \sum^r_{k=1}\sigma_k(\mathbf{v}, \mathbf{v}_k) \left\lVert\mathbf{w}_k \right\rVert \leq s\sum^r_{k=1}(\mathbf{v},\mathbf{v}_k) \leq s\left\lVert \mathbf{v} \right\rVert \]

> 3.10. Show that the rank of a matrix is the number of its non-zero singular values (counting multiplicities).

$\operatorname{rank}A = \dim \operatorname{Ran}A = \dim V - \dim \operatorname{Ker}A = \dim V - \dim \operatorname{Ker}|A| = \dim \operatorname{Ran}|A| = \operatorname{rank}|A|$. 又 $|A| = V\Sigma V^*$，非零奇异值数目（计算重数）即 $|A|$ 的秩。

> 3.11. Show that the operator norm of a matrix $A$ coincides with its Frobenius norm if and only if the matrix has rank one.

$ \left\lVert A \right\rVert_F = \sqrt{\operatorname{tr}(A^*A)} = \sqrt{\sum^n_{k=1} \sigma_k^2} \geq \sigma_1 = \left\lVert A \right\rVert $，仅 $n=1,0$ 时取等（题目似乎忽略了零矩阵）。

### 4. Applications of the singular value decomposition.

> 4.2. Let $A$ be a normal operator, and let $\lambda_1, \lambda_2, \ldots , \lambda_n$ be its eigenvalues (counting multiplicities). Show that singular values of $A$ are $|\lambda_1|, |\lambda_2|, \ldots  , |\lambda_n|$.

由谱定理，$A = V\Sigma V^*, A^* = V\Sigma^*V^*$，故 $AA^* = V\Sigma\Sigma^*V^*$，于是 $\sigma_k = \sqrt{\lambda_k\overline{\lambda_k}} = |\lambda_k|$

> 4.4. Let $A = \widetilde{W}\widetilde{\Sigma}\widetilde{V}^*$ be a reduced singular value decomposition of $A$. Show that $\operatorname{Ran}A = \operatorname{Ran}\widetilde{W}$, and then by taking adjoint that $\operatorname{Ran}A^∗ = \operatorname{Ran}\widetilde{V}$.

显然 $\operatorname{Ran}A \subseteq \operatorname{Ran}\widetilde{W}$，又 $\dim\operatorname{Ran}A = \operatorname{rank}A = r$，而 $\mathbf{w}_1, \mathbf{w}_2, \ldots \mathbf{w}_r$ 相互正交，即 $\dim\widetilde{W} = r$，故 $\operatorname{Ran}A = \operatorname{Ran}\widetilde{W}$.

> 4.6. (Tychonov’s regularization) Prove that the Moore–Penrose inverse $A^+$ can be computed as the limits \[ A^+ = \lim_{\varepsilon \to 0+}(A^*A + \varepsilon I)^{-1}A^* = \lim_{\varepsilon \to 0+}A^*(AA^* + \varepsilon I)^{-1}. \] 

对 $A$ 作 SVD 分解，$A = W\Sigma V^*, A^*A = V\Sigma^2V^*$，通过微扰 $\varepsilon I$ 消去为零项：

\[ A^*A + \varepsilon I = V\operatorname{diag}(\sigma_1^2+\varepsilon, \ldots ,\sigma_r^2+\varepsilon, \varepsilon, \ldots ,\varepsilon)V^*, \\ (A^*A + \varepsilon I)^{-1} = V^*\operatorname{diag}(\frac{1}{\sigma_1^2+\varepsilon}, \ldots ,\frac{1}{\sigma_r^2+\varepsilon}, \frac{1}{\varepsilon}, \ldots ,\frac{1}{\varepsilon})V. \]

\[ \begin{aligned}
 \lim_{\varepsilon \to 0+}(A^*A + \varepsilon I)^{-1}A^* &= \lim_{\varepsilon \to 0+}V^*\operatorname{diag}(\frac{\sigma_1}{\sigma_1^2+\varepsilon}, \ldots ,\frac{\sigma_r}{\sigma_r^2+\varepsilon}, 0, \ldots ,0)W \\
 &= V^*\operatorname{diag}(\frac{1}{\sigma_1}, \ldots ,\frac{1}{\sigma_r},0, \ldots ,0)W = A^+
\end{aligned}. \] 

### 6. Orientation

> 6.3. Let $U$ be an $n \times n$ orthogonal matrix, and let $\det U > 0$. Show that the $n \times n$ identity matrix $I_n$ can be continuously transformed through invertible matrices into $U$. 

选定一组正交基使得 $U = \operatorname{diag}(R_{\theta_1}, \ldots R_{\theta_k}, I_{n-2k})$，记 $U(t) = \operatorname{diag}(R_{t\theta_1}, \ldots R_{t\theta_k}, I_{n-2k}), t\in [1,0]$，显然 $U(t)$ 可逆。

> 6.4. Let $A$ be an $n\times n$ positive definite Hermitian matrix, $A = A^∗ > 0$. Show that the $n \times n$ identity matrix $I_n$ can be continuously transformed through invertible matrices into $A$.

由谱定理，$A = V \operatorname{diag}(\lambda_1, \ldots ,\lambda_n) V^*$，由 $A$ 正定知 $\lambda_k>0$，记 $A(t) = V \operatorname{diag}(e^{t\ln \lambda_1}, \ldots ,e^{t\ln \lambda_n})V^*, t\in [1,0]$，显然 $A(t)$ 可逆。

> 6.5. Using polar decomposition and Problems 6.3, 6.4 above, complete the proof of the “only if” part of Theorem 6.1.
> (Theorem 6.1.) Two bases $\mathcal{A} = \{\mathbf{a}_1, \ldots , \mathbf{a}_n\}$ and $\mathcal{B} = \{\mathbf{b}_1, \ldots , \mathbf{b}_n\}$ have the same orientation, if and only if one of the bases can be continuously transformed to the other.

对 $I_{\mathcal{B},\mathcal{A}}$ 作极分解，$I_{\mathcal{B},\mathcal{A}} = U|I_{\mathcal{B},\mathcal{A}}|$，前者为幺正算子，后者为正算子，且由题设 $\det I_{\mathcal{B},\mathcal{A}}>0$，故 $\det U > 0$，由 6.3, 6.4 即得证。