## Chapter 1 Basic Notions

### 2. Linear combinations, bases

> 2.6. Is it possible that vectors $\mathbf{v}_1, \mathbf{v}_2, \mathbf{v}_3$ are linearly dependent, but the vectors $\mathbf{w}_1 = \mathbf{v}_1 + \mathbf{v}_2, \mathbf{w}_2 = \mathbf{v}_2 + \mathbf{v}_3$ and $\mathbf{w}_3 = \mathbf{v}_3 + \mathbf{v}_1$ are linearly independent?

$$
\left(\begin{array}{c}
    \mathbf{w}_1 \\
    \mathbf{w}_2 \\
    \mathbf{w}_3
\end{array}\right) = \left(\begin{array}{ccc}
    1 & 1 & 0 \\
    0 & 1 & 1 \\
    1 & 0 & 1
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c}
    \mathbf{v}_1 \\
    \mathbf{v}_2 \\
    \mathbf{v}_3
\end{array}\right)
$$ $\dim(\mathbf{w}_1\,\mathbf{w}_2\,\mathbf{w}_3)^T\leq\dim(\mathbf{v}_1\,\mathbf{v}_2\,\mathbf{v}_3)^T<3$

### 3. Linear Transformations. Matrix–vector multiplication

> 3.6 The set $\mathbb{C}$ of complex numbers can be canonically identiﬁed with the space $\mathbb{R}^2$ by treating each $z = x + iy \in \mathbb{C}$ as a column $(x, y)^T ∈ \mathbb{R}^2$
>> c) Deﬁne $T(x + iy) = 2x − y + i(x − 3y)$. Show that this transformation is not a linear transformation in the complex vectors space $\mathbb{C}$, but if we treat $\mathbb{C}$ as the real vector space $\mathbb{R}^2$ then it is a linear transformation there (i.e. that $T$ is a real linear but not a complex linear transformation). Find the matrix of the real linear transformation $T$.

在 $\mathbb{C}$ 中 $iT(x+iy) = 3y-x + i(2x-y)$，$T(i(x+iy)) = -2y-x + i(-3x-y)$
在 $\mathbb{R}^2$ 中 $$T(x+iy) = \begin{pmatrix} 2 & -1 \\ 1 & -3 \\\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix} x \\ y \end{pmatrix}$$

### 6. Invertible transformations and matrices. Isomorphisms

> 6.7 Let $A$ and $AB$ be invertible (assuming that the product $AB$ is well deﬁned). Prove that $B$ is invertible.

$AB \mathbf{u_1} = AB \mathbf{u_2} \Leftrightarrow \mathbf{u_1} = \mathbf{u_2}$，作用 $A^{-1}$ 得 $B$ 是单射。$\forall \mathbf{w}\in W\,\exist \mathbf{v}\in V,\mathbf{u}\in U,\,AB \mathbf{u} = A \mathbf{v} = \mathbf{w}$，作用 $A^{-1}$ 得 $ B \mathbf{u} = \mathbf{v} $，由 $A^{-1}$ 为满射，故 $B$ 亦为满射。

> 6.13 Let $A$ be an invertible symmetric ($A^T = A$) matrix. Is the inverse of $A$ symmetric? Justify.

$ A^{-1}A = I \Rightarrow A^T(A^{-1})^T = I^T = I,\,AA^{-1}=I \Rightarrow (A^{-1})^TA^T = I$，即 $(A^{-1})^T$ 为 $A^T$ 之逆，$(A^{-1})^T = (A^T)^{-1} = A^{-1}$.

### 8. Application to computer graphics.

> 8.4 Write $4 \times 4$ matrix performing perspective projection to $x$-$y$ plane with center $(d_1, d_2, d_3)^T$.

将焦点沿 $x$-$y$ 平面平移至 $z$ 轴上，相应的操作 $$
S = \begin{pmatrix} 
      1 & 0 & 0 & -d_1 \\
      0 & 1 & 0 & -d_2 \\
      0 & 0 & 1 & 0 \\
      0 & 0 & 0 & 1
\end{pmatrix}, 
S^{-1} = \begin{pmatrix}
    1 & 0 & 0 & d_1 \\
    0 & 1 & 0 & d_2 \\
    0 & 0 & 1 & 0 \\
    0 & 0 & 0 & 1
\end{pmatrix}
$$ 投影：$$
P = \begin{pmatrix} 
    1 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\
    0 & 1 & 0 & 0 \\
    0 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\
    0 & 0 & -\frac{1}{d_3} & 1 \\ 
\end{pmatrix},\,\text{ 复合得 }S^{-1}PS = \begin{pmatrix} 
    1 & 0 & -\frac{d_1}{d_3} & 0 \\
    0 & 1 & -\frac{d_2}{d_3} & 0 \\
    0 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\
    0 & 0 & -\frac{1}{d_3} & 1 \\
\end{pmatrix} $$

> 8.5 A transformation $T$ in $\mathbb{R}^3$ is a rotation about the line $y = x+3$ in the $x$-$y$ plane through an angle $\gamma$. Write a $4 \times 4$ matrix corresponding to this transformation.

平移：$P_0 = (0,3,0)$，正交变换 $R_a$ 将旋转轴变为 $z$ 轴，绕 $z$ 轴旋转 $R_z(\gamma)$，$T = T_{P_0}R_aR_z(\gamma)R_a^{-1}T_{-P_0}$